---
title: Adverse Possession
tags:
---

Adverse possession is an unusual common law doctrine. We have already emphasized the point that legal possession and legal title are distinctive concepts. In general, "mere possession" does not disturb the legal title of the landowner, but the doctrine of adverse possession creates a dramatic exception to this rule. Under the doctrine, when a person has been in possession of land for longer than a period established by statute (called the *limitation period*), they may become the title holder—and the original title holder may end up with nothing. The ultimate effect of adverse possession is to take title out of the hands of the original owner and to put that title into the hands of the person in possession.

Adverse possession claims are not easily won. There is a laundry list of legal requirements that an adverse possessor needs to meet—in addition to possession beyond the limitation period—which we will examine later in the course. Our purpose in introducing adverse possession here is to explore how the doctrine helps us to understand the relationship between possession and title and how its underlying rationales came to be interpreted in the style of classical common law thought. From this perspective, adverse possession was fundamentally about competition between the title holder and the adverse possessor—competition that was generally resolved based on whether the court regarded the adverse possessor as a productive member of society putting land to good use or, alternatively, as a duplicitous trespasser seeking to take unfair advantage of the law.
