---
title: De Facto Expropriation
---


Recall that a claim of *de facto* expropriation is based on the theory that government has undertaken some type of activity that falls short of taking title to land or other property, but which nevertheless is tantamount to expropriation and therefore demands compensation. Since a modern framework for claims of *de facto* expropriation was articulated in *Mariner Real Estate Ltd v Nova Scotia*, that framework was subsequently picked up and largely endorsed by the Supreme Court of Canada in *Canadian Pacific Railway v Vancouver (City)*, below. That framework was recently revised in *Annapolis Group Inc. v Halifax Regional Municipality.

At roughly the same time as the Supreme Court was addressing this matter in *CPR*, another set of legal developments was also playing out at the international level under the *North American Free Trade Agreement* (*NAFTA*). *NAFTA*—an agreement between Canada, the United States and Mexico—provides parallel protections for *de facto* expropriation that are afforded to foreign investors in each of the member states (e.g. Canadian investors in Mexico, or American investors in Canada). These protections, however, are not defined by Canadian domestic law on *de facto* expropriation as expressed in cases like *Mariner Real Estate* and *CPR*. Rather, they are interpreted by an international tribunal that arbitrates claims between private investors and the state party accused of violating the investor's rights. Even more recently—and in part as a response to some of the criticisms of the original NAFTA regime—the NAFTA parties negotiated a new multilateral trade agreement to replace NAFTA. This is the *Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement* (*CUSMA*), signed in 2018. 
