---
title: "Week 10 - Alienability"
linktitle: "Week 10"
type: book
date: "2021-12-01"
weight: 0
---

<a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/slides/week10" target="_blank" rel="noopener">SLIDES</a>

Our final topic this term—and in the domain of classical common law thought—is the right to *alienate* property (i.e. the right sell or otherwise transfer it). Recall that we have already encountered alienation and restraints on alienation in the context of Aboriginal title going back to the Royal Proclamation in 1763. As we learn this week, the extent to which landowners can and should be able transfer their property rights to others and to place limits on alienation has long been a central issue in common law property.

As you will see from *Blackburn v McCallum* and *Re Walker*, below, these courts place a heavy emphasis on the free alienability of land. Any attempts to restrict free alienability are viewed with considerable scepticism in the classical style—consistent with the liberal ideal that property rights should support individuals to pursue their own ends. For example, in both *Blackburn* and *Walker*, the courts scrutinize clauses in a will that purport to limit how or when beneficiaries under that will can transfer the property interests they receive. This emphasis on free alienability has also become crucial for modern understandings of property as the basis for a market economy. 

In order to understand the controversies around alienability in *Blackburn* and *Walker*, you first need a bit of background on the common law doctrines of tenure and estates. This is a big topic—the primer below offers an overview and covers key terms.



## Tenures  and Estates ##
<a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/sheff.rtf" rel="noopener">RTF</a><a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/sheff.docx" rel="noopener">DOCX</a><a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/sheff.pdf" target="_blank" rel="noopener">PDF</a>

*From Jeremy Sheff, "Estates and Future Interests" in Stephen Clowney, James Grimmelmann, Michael Grynberg, Jeremy Sheff, and Rebecca Tushnet, eds., [Open Source Property: A Free Casebook](https://opensourceproperty.org) (2015).*

[According to the common law doctrine of tenure] all land under the dominion of the English crown is held “mediately or immediately, of the king”—that is, the crown has “radical title” to all land under its political dominion. William the Conqueror declared that all land in England was literally the king’s property; everyone else had to settle for the privilege of holding it for him—the privilege of *tenure* (from the Norman French word “tenir”—to hold). Tenurial rights were intensely personal in early feudal society: the right to hold land was a privilege granted by the crown in exchange for an oath of allegiance and a promise of military service by the tenant—the oath of homage. The word homage derives from the French word *homme*—literally “man”—precisely because the ceremony surrounding the oath created not only the right of tenure, but a political and military relationship between “lord and man.”  In exchange for the tenant’s loyal support, or *fealty*, the lord warranted the tenant’s right to hold a plot of land, called a fief, or *fee*.

Acceptance of this form of military tenure obligated the tenant to provide a certain number of knights when called on by the king, and the land held by the tenant was supposed to provide sufficient material support to enable him to meet this military obligation. Sometimes, by the process of *subinfeudation*, the King’s direct tenants (or “tenants-in-chief”) could spread this burden around by in turn accepting homage from other, lesser nobles and freemen, each of whom would be responsible to the tenant-in-chief for a portion of the tenant-in-chief’s obligation to provide knight-service. The tenants-in-chief thereby became “mesne lords” in their own right (“mesne” being Norman French for “middle” or “intermediate”). There could be several layers of mesne lords (i.e., “land lords”) in the feudal hierarchy, at the bottom of which were “tenants in demesne” (“demesne” being Norman French for “domain” or “dominion”)—who actually held the land rather than subinfeudating it further. Of course, holding land did not mean one actually worked it; a tenant in demesne often left the cultivation and productive use of land to those of lower social status. These could be “villeins”—serfs legally bound to the land by birth—or “leasehold” tenants—a leasehold being a right to hold land for a term of years in exchange for payment of rent in cash or (more often) kind, and of lesser status than the “freehold” estate held by feudal tenants tracing their rights up the feudal pyramid to the crown.

Because a feudal tenant’s land rights were intimately connected to this web of personal, political, and military relationships, there was no logical reason why the tenant ought to be free to transfer those rights to anyone else—and good reason for the lords to resist such alienation of the fee by their tenants. Indeed, fees could be forfeited to the lord for the tenant’s breach of the homage relationship or commission of some other “felony,” and on the tenant’s death it was not clear that his family members had the right to inherit the fee. The king was assumed to have the right to retake the fee and re-grant it to a preferable new tenant upon his displeasure with or the death of the old tenant (it was his land, after all). Within a century, however, the dynastic ambitions of the baronage compelled King Henry I to concede (in his Coronation Charter of 1100) that a recently deceased baron’s heir could redeem his fee upon payment of “a just and lawful relief”—i.e., a payment of money to the crown, as a kind of inheritance tax. Under the principle of primogeniture that took hold in England around this time, the lord’s heir was his eldest son; landowners were not free to choose who would take over their tenancy after their death. Thus, subject to the payment of a relief, the fee became *descendible*—capable of being inherited from one generation to the next—and the grant of a descendible tenancy by the crown was now made not “to Lord Hobnob,” but “to Lord Hobnob and his heirs.” To this day, the latter phrase remains the classic common-law formula for creating the broadest interest in land that the law will recognize: the *fee simple absolute*.

Descendibility of the fee simple having been settled early in the history of English land law, the broader question of full alienability took several more centuries to work out. The history of medieval English land law is a history of tenants trying to secure their families’ wealth and power by expanding alienability and evading tenurial obligations to their lords and the crown, while the crown and higher nobility tried to adapt the law to preserve their status and prevent such evasions. There is a dialectical quality to this history. For example: for complicated reasons subinfeudation quickly came to present a greater threat to the economic interests of the higher ranks of the feudal hierarchy than simple substitution of one tenant for another. Thus, in 1290 the Statute of Quia Emptores banned subinfeudation. But in doing so it validated substitution, and with it the practice of selling an entire fee in exchange for money during the life of the tenant. Similarly, in 1536, at the insistence of King Henry VIII, the Statute of Uses abolished many clever schemes adopted by tenants to use intermediaries to direct the disposition of real property interests after death and to put those interests outside the reach of the law courts (and of the crown’s feudal authority). But in doing so, the statute validated one type of flexible property arrangement we have come to know as a *trust*. Moreover, the removal of the primary mechanism lawyers had developed to meet tenants’ demand for intergenerational planning was sufficiently unpopular that Henry felt compelled to consent to the enactment of the Statute of Wills in 1540—finally permitting tenants to pass their legal estates in land by will rather than being at the whim of the rule of primogeniture. Finally, since the 16th century, primogeniture has given way to a more complex system of default inheritance rights for various relatives of the deceased who leaves no will; these rights are designed to try to approximate what legislatures think the *decedent* would have wanted, not necessarily what is best for the government. This set of default rights comprises the law of *intestate succession* […]

Various other statutes and common-law developments over the centuries culminated in the system of possessory estates and future interests that were imported into the North American English colonies, and thus into the independent American states (excluding Louisiana). Underlying them all is a fundamental distinction that traces back to the “radical title” asserted by William the Conqueror in 1066: there is a conceptual difference between the ownership of land and the ownership of a legal interest in that land […]

{{% callout warning %}} 

### Ownership and Common Law Estates in Land

The excerpt above describing the feudal history of tenures and estates identifies a key premise of common law property in land. There is, in essence, no room in the common law for the idea of *absolute, private landownership*—neither in the sense of owning the land itself directly nor in the sense of owning underlying or radical title. At most, private owners can hold an *estate in land*—that is, a legal interest interposed between the owner and the land subject to the owner's property rights. 
{{% /callout %}}

### Basic Estates and Future Interests

We will begin by examining two possessory estates—the **fee simple absolute** and the **life estate**—and two future interests (one of which you have already encountered)—the **reversion** and the **remainder**.

#### The Fee Simple Absolute

The fee simple absolute is the most complete interest in land that the law will recognize. When we say that “O owns Blackacre” without any further qualification, what we actually mean is that O owns a presently possessory fee simple absolute in Blackacre. The key distinguishing characteristic of the fee simple absolute is that it has no inherent end—it is an estate of indefinite duration. It is descendible, devisable, and alienable inter vivos; so it can be transferred to a new owner, but it cannot be destroyed. At most, it can be carved up into lesser estates and interests for a while, and we will spend most of the rest of this chapter understanding how that happens.

At common law, as previously noted, the fee simple absolute was created by the formula: “to A and his heirs.” That formula still works, but in modern usage it is sufficient to simply say “to A,” and the use of such language in a conveyance from the owner of a fee simple absolute will be presumed to create a fee simple absolute in A.

#### The Life Estate

The life estate is just what it sounds like: an estate that confers a right to possession for the life of its owner. The owner of a life estate is referred to as a life tenant. The life estate terminates by operation of law upon the owner’s death (i.e., it ceases to exist). It is created by the formula: “to A for life.” Because it must by definition end—we all have to die sometime—any land held by a life tenant must also be subject to a future interest in some other person. We’ll explore what those future interests might be shortly.

[…]

#### The Reversion

[…] Consider what happens when A, owning a life estate in Blackacre, dies. A’s life estate terminates by operation of law; it simply ceases to exist and disappears. Who “owns” Blackacre now? It seems obvious that somebody must have a right to possession of the land, but it seems equally obvious that whoever that somebody is, they had no right to possession before A died. Whoever they are, during the term of A’s life estate they must have held an interest that would entitle them to take possession at some point in the future (that is, a future interest).

There are two candidates for such an interest. We will begin with the most basic: the reversion. Suppose that O, owning a fee simple absolute in Blackacre, conveys Blackacre “to A for life,” and says nothing more? What is the legal effect of this grant?

Based on the formula we just learned, it should be clear that A receives a life estate in Blackacre. But what other effects does the grant have on the legal rights of the parties? Think about the interest O held prior to the conveyance: the fee simple absolute. Remember that a fee simple absolute is an interest of infinite duration—it never ends. So when O starts with a possessory interest of infinite duration, and then gives away a life estate—whose duration is limited by a human lifespan—to A, something was left over. Specifically, O never gave away the right to possession of Blackacre from the day of A’s death to the end of time. Whether meaning to or not, O gave away less of an interest in Blackacre than what he owned, meaning he still holds some interest. We call this type of interest—the residual interest left over when a grantor gives away less than they have—a retained interest.

This retained interest can’t entitle O to possession during A’s life—A has the exclusive right to possession as the life tenant. So O’s interest must be a future interest during the term of A’s life estate: an interest that will entitle O to possession after the natural termination of the life estate. As we discussed in the example of the lease, we call this kind of future interest a reversion. It is a retained interest in the grantor—created when a grantor conveys less than his entire interest—that will become possessory by operation of law upon the natural termination of the preceding estate. Colloquially, we say that Blackacre “reverts” to O. In some opinions, you will see the holder of a reversion referred to as a “reversioner.”

A reversion can of course also be created explicitly, for example, if O conveys Blackacre “to A for life, then to O.” In this case, O has explicitly created a life estate in A followed by a reversion in O.

#### The Remainder

A remainder is a type of future interest created in someone other than the grantor. The distinguishing characteristic of the remainder is that—like a reversion—it cannot cut short or divest any possessory estate. (We will later encounter other future interests that can.) A remainder simply “remains,” sitting around and waiting for the natural termination of the preceding possessory estate (be it a life estate or a lease), at which point the remainder will become possessory by operation of law. Suppose that O, owning a fee simple absolute in Blackacre, conveys Blackacre “to A for life, and then to B.” Again, A would have a life estate, but now O has also affirmatively created a future interest in B. Because the future interest is created in someone other than the grantor, it isn’t a reversion. And because it cannot cut short A’s life estate (note the “and then” language), it must therefore be a remainder. Due to the persistence of dated gendered terms in legal discourse, you will often see the holder of a remainder referred to as a “remainderman,” even today, regardless of that person’s gender.

[…]

## Restraints on Alienation ##

In Week 8, we interpreted the issue of remedy in nuisance as an example of the fundamental contradiction facing common law courts working in the liberal tradition. In cases like *Canadian Paper Co.* and *Canadian Copper Co.*, we saw that it was impossible for one landowner to use their land freely without placing limitations on the rights of other landowners to do the same. 

Attempts to restrain alienation provide another example of this contradiction. In the cases below, the *testator* (i.e., the person making the will) attempts to place restrictions on the free alienability of property they *devise* (i.e., pass on through the will). In *Walker*, that restriction is an attempt to direct what happens to the property once the recipient under the will (the *devisee*) dies. In *Blackburn*, the testator attempts to prevent the devisees from "encumbering" (such as by mortgaging) the land for a period of twenty-five years. From the perspective of the testators in these cases, they are simply exercising their freedom to do with their property whatever they choose. But from the perspective of devisees, the testators' actions directly impair their own choices about what to do with their newly acquired property. Once again, the clash of individual freedoms is impossible to reconcile except by some application of social controls that weigh and determine whose interests should win out. 

As you read *Walker*, notice how Justice Middleton employs and interprets the concept of common law estates discussed above to reach his decision. 

## *Re Walker* (1925), 56 OLR 517 ##
<a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/walker.rtf" rel="noopener">RTF</a><a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/walker.docx" rel="noopener">DOCX</a><a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/walker.pdf" target="_blank" rel="noopener">PDF</a>

**Middleton, J.A:**

[1] An appeal from the judgment of Mr. Justice Riddell pronounced on the 27th September, 1924, declaring that the estate of the late Ellen Fitze Walker does not include any part of the estate of the late John Walker undisposed of by her at the time of her death.

[2] John Walker died on the 27th March, 1903, and first made his will, bearing date the 17th November, 1902, which was in due course admitted to probate, his widow being his sole executrix. At the time of his death his estate amounted to approximately $16,000. By his will he provided as follows:
> "I give and devise unto my said wife all my real and personal property saving and excepting thereout as follows namely my gold watch and chain I give to my nephew John Noble Walker son of my brother William Walker and all other jewellery I may have at the time of my decease I give to my nephews William Craig Walker and Percy Dugald Walker brothers of the said John Noble Walker share and share alike and also should any portion of my estate still remain in the hands of my said wife at the time of decease undisposed of by her such remainder shall be divided follows …"

[3] The widow survived until 1922. Her will has been duly admitted to probate. Her estate, including all that remained of her husband's estate, was valued at $38,000.

[4] Those claiming under the husband's will seek to have some portion of this estate earmarked as being an "undisposed of" portion of the husband's estate. Those claiming under the wife's will contend that under the provision of the husband's will the widow took absolutely. Mr. Justice Riddell decided in favour of those claiming under the husband's will. From this decision an appeal is now had.

[5] From the earliest times the attempt has been made to accomplish the impossible, to give and yet to withhold, to confer an absolute estate upon the donee, and yet in certain events to resume ownership and to control the destiny of the thing given. By conveyance this is impossible. Where there is absolute ownership, that ownership confers upon the owner the rights of an owner and restrains an alienation; and similar attempts to mould and control the law are void: *In re Rosher* (1884), 26 Ch. D. 801.

[6] As long ago as 1498 (13 Hen. VII. 22, 23, pi. 9), Bryan, C.J., interrupted counsel arguing before him that a condition on a fee simple not to alien was good, saying that the Court "would not hear him argue this conceit, because it is simply contrary to common learning and is now, so to speak, a principle … because in this way we should transpose all our old precedents. Therefore speak no more of this point:" Gray's Restraints on the Alienation of Property, 2nd ed., pp. 9, 10.

[7] By an executory devise testators succeed in many cases in attaining that which would have otherwise been impossible — creating a future right which would on the happening of certain events come into existence and terminate a pre-existing estate in fee simple, but limits have been placed upon this right constituting exceptions to the general rule that an estate given by will may be defeated on the happening of any event.
> One of these exceptions may, in my opinion, be expressed in this manner, that any executory devise, defeating or abridging an estate in fee by altering the course of its devolution, which is to take effect at the moment of devolution and at no other time, is bad. The reason alleged for that is the contradiction or contrariety between the principle of law which regulates the devolution of the estate and the executory devise which is to take effect only at the moment of devolution, and to alter its course … Another exception to the general proposition which I have stated is this, that any executory devise which is to defeat an estate, and who is to take effect on the exercise of any of the rights incident to the estate, is void; and there again the alleged reason is the contrariety or contradiction existing between the nature of the estate given and the nature of the executory devise over. A very familiar illustration is this, that any executory devise to take effect on an alienation, or an attempt at alienation, is void, because the right of alienation is incident to every estate in fee simple as to every other estate. Another illustration of the same principle is that which arises where the exercise of the executory devise over is made to take effect upon not alienating, because the right to enjoy without alienation is incident to the estate given.

[8] I quote Fry, J. *Shaw v. Ford*(1877), 7 Ch. D. 669, 673, 674), and as complementary to this quotation I would refer to the learned discussion of this case in the decision of O'Connor, M.E., in an Irish case, *In re O'Hare*, [1918] 1 I.E. 160.

[9] When a testator gives property to one, intending him to have all the rights incident to ownership, and adds to this a gift over of that which remains in specie at his death or at the death of that person, he is endeavouring to do that which is impossible. His intention is plain but it cannot be given effect to. The Court has then to endeavour to give such effect to the wishes of the testator as is legally possible, by ascertaining which part of the testamentary intention predominates and by giving effect to it, rejecting the subordinate intention as being repugnant to the dominant intention.

[10] So the cases fall into two classes: the first, in which the gift to the person first named prevails and the gift over fails as repugnant; the second, in which the first named takes a life-estate only, and so the gift over prevails. Subject to an apparent exception to be mentioned, there is no middle course, and in each case the inquiry resolves itself into an endeavour to apply this rule to the words of the will in question. The sheep are separated from the goats; and, while in most instances there is not much doubt, in some instances the classification is by no means easy.

[11] Speaking generally, no aid can be derived from reported decisions which do not establish a principle but simply seek to apply an established principle to a particular document. Nothing can well be added to the statements of Jessel, M.E., in *Aspden v. Seddon* (1874), L.E. 10 Ch. 397, note, and of Collins, M.R., in *Foulger v. Arding*, [1902] 1 K.B. 700. These being readily accessible, I refrain from quoting at length, only extracting a few words from the earlier decision (p. 397): 
> I think it is the duty of a Judge to ascertain the construction of the instrument before him, and not to refer to the construction put by another Judge upon an instrument, perhaps similar, but not the same.

[12] No better illustration of the danger of relying upon earlier decisions and disregarding the document under consideration can be found than in the cases dealing with this very subject. *Constable v. Bull*, 3 DeG. & Sm. 411, always cited, is a most unsatisfactory case, because the Court, while recognising the true rule, did great violence to the words of the will. *Re Sheldon and Kemble*(1885), 53 L.T.R. 537, followed, and instead of seeking to apply the rule to the will there in question the Court tried to distinguish between the words of the will in the case in hand and the words of the will in the earlier case. An Australian case, *Wright v. Wright*, [1913] Vict. L.R. 358, points out the unsatisfactory result.

[13] To quote again from Sir George Jessel's judgment (L.R. 10 Ch. at p. 398), already referred to, "And so the construction has gone on until we find a document which is in totally different terms from the first, and which no human being would think of construing in the same manner, but which has by this process come to be construed in the same manner."

[14] A note in 40 L.Q.R., 3.93-395, discusses this principle and refers to other cases.

[15] I have referred to an apparent exception to the rule which might be regarded as constituting a third class of cases into which some fall. These are cases in which all that is given to the first taker is a life-estate, but the life-tenant is given a power of sale which may be exercised at any time during the currency of his estate. There is no doubt that this may be validly done. It is not uncommon in cases where property is held in trust. In such cases power of sale is frequently vested in trustees who are empowered to sell and pay the purchase-money to the life-tenant for his maintenance. *Re Johnson* (1912), 27 O.L.R. 472, is a good example. These cases constitute only an apparent exception to the rule because in them there is no conflict upon the face of the gift. Whether a case can be brought within this class is altogether a matter of construction, and the will here in hand plainly does not fall within it.

[16] The case of *Shearer v. Hogg* (1912), 46 Can. S.C.R. 492, affirming the judgment in *Shearer v. Forman* (1911), Q.R. 40 S.C. 139, is sometimes referred to as in conflict with these views. It is a case governed by the Civil Law, which recognises substitution "*de residuo*" or "*de eo quod supererit*" something quite unknown to the English law. The Court was endeavouring to ascertain the intention of the testator to determine if there was a valid substitution. The remarks as to the similarity of the law of the two Provinces must be taken as directed to the duty of the Court to ascertain the intention of the testator and when it is possible so to do to give effect to it. The Supreme Court decision is more readily understood when the judgment in the Court below is read.

[17] Turning now to the will before the Court. I agree with the judgment in review that the words "undisposed of" do not refer to a testamentary disposition by the widow but refer to a disposal by her during her lifetime. I am, however, unable to agree with the construction placed upon the will otherwise. It appears to be plain that there is here an attempt to deal with that which remains undisposed of by the widow, in a manner repugnant to the gift to her. I think the gift to her must prevail and the attempted gift over must be declared to be repugnant and void.

[18] I would therefore allow the appeal and declare the construction of the will accordingly. Costs may well come out of the wife's estate.

[19] Appeal allowed.


## *Blackburn v McCallum*, [1903] 33 SCR 65 ##
<a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/blackburn.rtf" rel="noopener">RTF</a><a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/blackburn.docx" rel="noopener">DOCX</a><a class="btn btn-outline-primary my-1 mr-1 btn-sm" href="/cases/blackburn.pdf" target="_blank" rel="noopener">PDF</a>

**Davies J. —**

[1] The question raised for our decision in this case is whether a general prohibition on alienation attached to a devise in fee of lands which prohibition would, if unlimited, be bad by the rules of Common Law, is made good by being limited as to time. I am of opinion that it is not. The will of Donald Chisholm after devising his farm of 100 acres to his two sons William and Hugh in fee and equally dividing it between them, contained the following provision: 

> I will that the aforesaid parcels of land shall not be at their disposal at any time until the end of twenty-five years from the date of my decease, and farther, I will that the said parcels of land shall remain free from all incumbrance, and that no debts contracted by my sons, William Chisholm and Hugh Chisholm, shall by any means incumber the same during twenty-five years from the date of my decease.

[2] With the exception of the limitation as to time the restraint upon alienation by the devisees is general. The question is one of real property law, and it is a pure question of authority. The general rule avoiding conditions which prohibited a grantee in fee from alienating his land is to be found clearly laid down in all the earlier books of authority, and is founded upon principles about which there can be no doubt and which are easily intelligible. But there can be equally little doubt that upon this general rule there have been grafted several exceptions. The cases of *Gill v. Pearson*, in which the judgment of the full Court of King’s Bench was delivered by Lord Ellenborough, and the later case of *In re Macleay*, decided by Jessell M.R., establish the existence of exceptions to the general rule which it is not necessary for us to call in question. These two cases determine that a restriction upon alienation prohibiting it to a particular class of individuals is good. All the leading text writers upon real property law cite these cases with approval and in my opinion it is too late in the day now for us to call them in question. The whole subject is reviewed exhaustively by Pearson J. in the case of *In re Rosher*. The same question that is now before us was there before him and he held that the proviso in the will he was construing amounted to an absolute restraint upon alienation during the life of the testator’s widow and that it was void in law. The learned judge, while admitting that authority could be found in the notes to Shepherd’s Touchstone, 7th ed., p. 130, for the proposition that a “grantee might also be restrained from alienation for a particular time being a reasonable one,” went on to declare, p. 821: 

> But there has been no judicial decision to that effect; and it is a curious thing that although Littleton’s book is more than 400 years old and although Lord Coke died 250 years ago there is not a single judicial decision to be found in the books shewing that a limitation as to time added to such a condition makes it a valid condition.

[3] He further stated that even without judicial decision, if he found that this had been an “accepted dictum of law,” and that by not following it he should be disturbing anything done in former times over and over again on the faith of the dictum, he should feel himself bound by it, and that it would be exceedingly mischievous to attempt to alter any rule which had been adopted and acquiesced in for more than a century. But he does not find that any such rule existed with respect to the validity of a general restraint upon alienation being validated by a limitation of the time within which it is to be exercised, and he concludes as follows:

> I find that the original rule which says that you cannot annex to a gift in fee simple a condition which is repugnant to that gift is a plain and intelligible rule. So far as I can find that an exception to the rule has been laid down and judiciously decided, I am bound by that exception. But I will not add other exceptions for which I can find no authority and the addition of which to my mind will only introduce uncertainty and confusion into the law which we have to administer.

[4] If an exception to a general rule of law is well established by the cases I am not bound to inquire into the logical sufficiency of the reasons given. And so I do not feel it necessary to discuss the cases of *Gill v. Pearson*, or *In re Macleay*, or to justify the reasons which underlaid these decisions. In allowing this appeal we are, it is true, following the decision of *Re Rosher*, but we are not over-ruling either of the other cases above referred to in which limited restraints upon alienation were allowed. The decision we have reached while not being contrary to any judicial decision in England follows that of Pearson J. in *Re Rosher*, and is in line with the late cases of *Re Parry v. Daggs*; *Corbett v. Corbett*; and also with *Renaud v. Tourangeau*; and the Irish case of *Martin v. Martin*.

[5] We have of course been pressed by the case of *Earls v. McAlpine* decided by the Court of Appeal for Ontario in 1881. The restriction upon alienation in that case was no doubt one limited as to time and on the point we have now before us. But the case of *Re Rosher* had not then been decided, and the authorities cited by Mr. Justice Patterson, namely, *Daniel v. Abby*; *Doe v. Pearson*; and *In Re Macleay*; while they support the contention that a restriction upon alienation limited to a specified class only may be good, do not support the proposition we are asked to indorse that a general restriction upon alienation which, if unrestricted as to time would be admittedly bad, is made good by a time limitation. It seems to me that a time limitation is necessary in any case where restrictions upon alienations are attempted to be imposed upon a fee simple devise, even with respect to a class of persons; otherwise the devise might be bad as contravening the rule against perpetuities. But I cannot concur in the proposal that we should enlarge the exceptions to the general rule against restrictions upon alienations by the addition of one not at any rate judicially adopted in England and which would give validity to a restriction otherwise bad simply by limiting the time during which it should last. I cannot find any rule for determining how long this time might be beyond that suggested by Mr. Preston in his note to Shepherd’s Touchstone, p. 130, that “it must not trench on the law against perpetuities.” But while that suggestion with respect to a time limitation may be good and necessary when applied to restrictions limited to a class of persons, and which might otherwise be bad for remoteness, I cannot, either on reason or authority, find that its application to a general restriction bad in itself operates to make that restriction good.

[6] The appeal should be allowed with costs and it should be declared that Hugh Chisholm took a fee simple absolute by his father’s will in the lands devised to him and was able to convey the same in fee notwithstanding the restriction in the will. And also that the fee simple in the lands was subject to sale under execution as against Hugh Chisholm for his debts.

[7] Appeal allowed without costs.
