---
style: Debates and Proceedings from the Nova Scotia House of Assembly
short: hansard
reporter: 'Thursday, October 2, 2003, p 372-4'
tags:
  - economy
---

MR. SPEAKER: The honourable member for Cole Harbour-Eastern Passage.

MR. KEVIN DEVEAUX: Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to be able to get up and speak a bit about this bill, Bill No. 1, the first bill to be debated in the new session after an election and, let's be honest, I think all of us to some extent or another in the last election, in that 28 to 30 day period that we were involved in it, actually heard a lot about insurance. I've been listening to the different debates and particularly, obviously, from members from this side of the House, Opposition members, members from the Third Party, members from our Party. I haven't heard much from the Tory caucus yet. I would hope that maybe they would take the chance to get up because this is an opportunity for them to put on the record what they heard from their constituents because presumably from this bill we can presume that the government has talked to their constituents, that the constituents have expressed to them the desire that this type of legislation come forward.

I must say that's a very different opinion than I received when I was on the doorstep because the Nova Scotians I spoke to, the people in my riding of Cole Harbour-Eastern Passage, had a very different perspective. They wanted lower rates, Mr. Speaker. They wanted lower rates that could be guaranteed and that could be based on a legitimate form of insurance and, quite frankly, this bill doesn't provide that. This bill is, quite frankly, trying to tinker with a free market system that we have in this province. We have a free market system of insurance. If I want insurance for my vehicle, of course it's mandatory according to the Motor Vehicle Act, to drive a car I need insurance, then I go to the marketplace and there are private companies that will provide me with insurance.

That system had in the past worked well for our province, but I would suggest to you the system is broken, that it has failed and that the rates now are not good enough. They are too high and many Nova Scotians are unable to afford insurance. We see that in the rates on which the number of people who are being charged with driving without insurance has increased. Most of them are telling us they can't afford the insurance. So it's important for them to go out and actually drive.

Now, we all know that's not legal, or that's not right and, of course, that isn't appropriate, but there are other means of trying to ensure that people can drive while ensuring that they have automobile insurance so that they and others, if they get in an accident, are protected. That's really what this system is about. Don't drive a vehicle unless you have a pool of money for which, if you get in an accident, that money can be drawn upon to ensure that people are going to be protected, whether you hit a pedestrian in a crosswalk, or whether you bump into someone else's car, or whether they bump into you.

Mr. Speaker, there needs to be a pool of money through insurance to ensure that that money is going to be there to protect people and ensure that they are going to be able to be provided for because in some cases it's very serious, in death obviously, but people can be paralyzed. People could have a closed head injury that could result in them spending the rest of their lives never being able to work again and some of the cases you hear about, obviously, are very compassionate, but the fact is that, you know, some of the most classic examples I recall from days of studying are those in which someone may be 20 or 22 years old, or maybe a little older, in their 20s, and they just finished their university degree, or maybe they just finished medical school, or maybe they just finished law school and they have great potential to become someone who is going to earn a lot of money in their life and they are struck by a car, or they are in a car accident, and there has to be some determination through the Insurance Act. That's what we provide - rules and regulations as to how we determine what those policies will provide for so that those people are provided with an income and that income should be based on future loss, future potential loss in many cases.

It's not so hard when they're 50 and you already know what their career is or if they're younger maybe but, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that we have a very complicated system in this province, a complicated system of how we determine through the courts how much someone will be paid if they are injured and they are not able to go back to work - whether that's for a day, a week, a month or for the rest of their life.

That system, as I said, had worked well. The problem is that it hasn't been working, not that people haven't been compensated if they are injured, not that people aren't getting the money they deserve if someone else hits them with a vehicle and they are in a car or are a pedestrian, that part hasn't broken down; what has broken down, Mr. Speaker, is the cost that is prohibitive to so many Nova Scotians that prevents them from being able to afford the insurance. And in a province like ours, a car is not only a privilege, it's invaluable.

In many parts of this province outside of Halifax and maybe parts of CBRM, there is no choice. The concept of having public transit, to be able to transport you around as a means of going for groceries or going to the store to buy clothing, it's just not practical, it's not there. So a car is a necessity. Because of that, a car becomes a necessity in rural Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker, to most Nova Scotians, therefore we must ensure that we have affordable insurance.

This government, Mr. Speaker, has taken the position that affordable insurance comes from sticking a monkey wrench in the free market system. This bill basically tells the insurance companies, and I suspect they were aware this was coming, I suspect there were consultations with the insurance industry, that this isn't coming out of the blue to them. Considering the same day this bill came out, the Insurance Bureau of Canada had full page ads in the local newspapers saying how they felt this was a wonderful idea. So I don't think I'm too far off in suggesting there might have been some consultations between the government and the Insurance Bureau of Canada before this bill ever hit the desks of the members in this House.

But because of this, Mr. Speaker, as I say, a money [*sic*] wrench has been driven into the free market system. This has already been tried in New Brunswick, a few months ago, and we are beginning to already see the problems that have been caused by this approach. I find it quite ironic that a Party like the Progressive Conservative Party that for so many is equated with a Party of the free market, a Party of a form of neo-Liberalism in which we ensure that business should be able - we should get off the backs of business.

I remember a few years ago when this Party got re-elected to government in 1999, Mr. Speaker, they created a red tape committee because they wanted to make sure that we were going to reduce the red tape for business so that business could get on with the job of creating jobs and government would do the job of minimizing the amount of regulation that would be required. We didn't hear much of it after awhile. I think the backbenchers who were involved sort of petered out and decided to do something else.

But the fact is, that this government has a history, or this Party that is the government, Mr. Speaker, has a history of presenting itself as the Party supporting the free market system. Supporting a system that ensures that business should be able to be minimally regulated and, in return, they will ensure that most of the money that they spend will be in creating jobs and putting it back into the economy, sort of the free hand of capitalism. That is what the Progressive Conservative Party has generally stood for over the years. That's what this government, I think, has generally run itself on.

Yet what do we see in this legislation? We see massive regulation, we see complicated rules imposed on businesses as some form or way of manipulating or twisting the free market system as a means of trying to argue we can reduce rates. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, this government, I think, knew when this issue became a clear and present problem for them in January 2002, almost two years ago, when people started getting their renewal rates, and people started realizing the cost. Then the government said well we have a problem because the free market isn't working. The private insurance companies aren't able to provide this at a rate that most Nova Scotians can afford, it's going sky-high, this is a problem, what are we going to do?

Well there are a few options. Our Party decided to take one of those options, Mr. Speaker, and say the free market system isn't working. In most cases we wouldn't say that. Our Party believes that in most cases the free market system works just fine. There are a few problems with regard to auto insurance though. Unlike most products where you have the automatic choice of deciding whether you want to buy this or buy that, or whether you want to buy the product at all. Do you want to buy guns or butter, I guess, as most economists would say, or do you want to buy butter or margarine, different types of the same product. With regard to auto insurance, consumers have no choice. They have to buy it if they have a car and as I said earlier, a car is a necessity in this province and therefore, quite frankly, most people in Nova Scotia have no choice. They have to buy insurance. In the free market system - well really, it isn't a free market system if they are forced to buy it - we have a problem where those people are not able to get affordable insurance."
