---
style: Piper v Stevenson
short: Piper
reporter: '1913 CanLII 615 (ON CA), [1913] 12 DLR 820'
public: true
sources:
  - source_name: CanLII
    source_url: 'https://canlii.ca/t/gw5tl'
    license: 'https://www.canlii.org/en/info/terms.html#license'
    attribution: ''
---

### Clute J. —

The plaintiff claims as owner and occupier of lots 28 and 29, block "A," Marmot street, North Toronto, registered plan No. 722, and asks an injunction restraining the defendant from trespass and for damages for former trespass and forcible entry. The defendant denies that the plaintiff is the owner of the lots in question, and says that he purchased the same from the registered owner thereof, and thereupon entered into possession of the same and built a fence thereon and planted a crop, which are the trespasses complained of.

In March, 1901, the plaintiff bargained for the adjoining lots with one Whaley, and in May or June delivered to Whaley a buggy in part payment. In September the plaintiff enclosed the Whaley lots and the lots in question by a fence, but did not receive the deeds of the Whaley lots until the 4th February, 1902, when three of them were conveyed to the plaintiff, and the 4th July, when the remaining three were conveyed to the plaintiff. In the fall, probably in October, after the fencing took place, the plaintiff had manure drawn upon the lands in question; and the evidence shews that they have been cultivated and cropped by the plaintiff ever since. 

The plaintiff did not reside upon the land in question, nor upon the lots purchased from Whaley, until 1905 or 1906, but lived at a short distance therefrom, upon a rented farm, from which she could walk to the lots in about fifteen minutes, or drive in five minutes. The Whaley lots, and the lots in question, formed a block, and were wholly enclosed from September, 1901, until action brought on the 21st June, 1912. 

The learned trial Judge finds that the lands in question "were fenced in with her own as one lot" in September, "and all the lots thus enclosed were together ploughed as one lot, and during the following winter manure was drawn out and placed upon the land. Everything was done to it that an owner intending to possess and cultivate it would have done. In the following spring it was cropped, and from that time on it was cultivated until the crop was taken, off, when fall ploughing and manuring were again done. And this has gone on continuously ever since. In the years 1905 and 1906, buildings were erected, and in the latter year the plaintiff went to live and has ever since lived there. Her possession has been all along open, obvious, exclusive, and continuous. Until 1906, everything was done upon the land that an owner could do in reaping the full benefit of it ; and, since the spring of that year, everything that an owner in actual, constant occupation would do. All this is well proved by the witnesses Doughty, Whaley, and Newman as well as by the plaintiff and her husband." 

I think that this is a fair statement as a result of the evidence. The learned trial Judge then proceeds: "I cannot think that the logical result of the reasoning in any of the decided cases can be that there can be no possession which would ripen into a right to the land unless the possessor also lives upon it; and, if it were, I would be quite unable to follow it to that extent in this case. Here there was the plainest evidence of wrongful possession, in the fencing in of the land in question as part and parcel of the plaintiff's land alone, calling for action on the owner's part if he desired to save his rights—action in removing the fences or in the Courts of justice; and, in addition to that, there was the continuous use by the plaintiff for her own benefit, for upwards of ten years before any such action was taken; and so the rights of the owner became barred by statute." 

Mr. Armour strongly urged that what was done by or on behalf of the plaintiff in respect of fencing and occupation of the lots did not bring the case within the purview of the statute so as to give her a title, because the work was done by her servant, and she did not personally reside upon the land until some five or six years after the property was fenced. He further urged that the deeds to the plaintiff of the adjoining lots not having been given until February, 1902, the possession of the adjoining lots was in the owner of them, and the lot in question could not be considered as enclosed with the plaintiff's until she received the deed; and that the entry by the defendant after he had received his deed, he then having the paper title, vested the property in him, the statute not having run a sufficient length of time from the date of the deed of the adjoining lots to the plaintiff and the entry by the defendant. 

The plain answer to that, I think, is this: it is wholly immaterial whether the plaintiff had received a deed of the adjoining lots or not; she had bargained for them, and fenced them in, in September, 1901; and her possession of them and of the land in question was continuous and exclusive from the date of fencing. 

As to the entry, such as it was, under the law as it now stands, it could have no effect. Since the Act, sec. 8, no person shall be deemed to have been in possession of any land within the meaning of the Act merely by reason of having made an entry thereon. "Under the old law a merely formal entry by the person entitled was sufficient to vest the possession in him: Co. Litt. 253b; though under 4 & 5 Anne ch. 16, sec. 16, such an entry or claim was not effectual to avoid the statute 21 Jac. I. ch. 16, unless an action was commenced within a year and prosecuted with effect...The result is that an entry, to vest the possession in the person entering and prevent the bar of the statute, must be effective as opposed to merely formal. The making an entry amounts to nothing unless something is done to divest the possession out of the tenant, and revest it in fact in the lord: *Doe v. Coombes* (1860), 9 , C.B. 714, at p. 718. And it must be made *animo possidendi*: *Soiling v. Broughton*, [18 , 63] A.C. 556." In the *Coombes* case, after the encroachment, the lord of the manor, accompanied by the steward, entered. The lord stated that he took possession, and directed that a stone should be taken out of the wall of the hut, and that a portion of the fence should be removed. This was held no more than a mere entry, and not sufficient to vest the possession in the lord. See Lightwood's Time Limit on Actions, pp. 11, 12. 

It is said in *Worssam v. Vandenbrande* (1868), 17 W.R. 53, that slighter acts will be sufficient if no person is actually on the land at the time of re-entry, although the possession may not be vacant. In that case the predecessors in title went to the land, broke down the fence, and erected a post with the announcement that applications fora lease of the land were to be made to them. They remained on the land three-quarters of an hour. Three days later, the post was gone, but there was no evidence to shew who had removed it. For the next five years no one, so far as appeared, did anything on the land, and then the defendant re-entered and built upon it. It was held that the plaintiffs' predecessors had effectually resumed possession. 

The present case differs from that quoted in several particulars. The land has been continuously used and occupied down to the present time by the plaintiff. The plaintiff was in fact residing upon the land at the time the alleged entry was made, that is, upon the block of which the lands in question form a part, being one enclosure for the whole. Also here the ten years had elapsed after the enclosure and before the entry; and the entry was such as, I think, expressly falls within sec. 8 of the Act. 

There remains, therefore, for consideration, only the question as to whether or not a piece of land entirely enclosed with other lands by the plaintiff, used and occupied by her continuously for over ten years, her possession all along being "open, obvious, exclusive, and continuous," does not come within the statute, simply because in the earlier four or five years she did not live upon the land; that is, was personally absent during the winter, although the land remained still enclosed by the fence and was used and occupied as an owner would use and occupy in such a case. 

The authority chiefly relied on by Mr. Armour was *Coffin v. North American Land Co.*, 21 O.R. 80. In several respects the facts in that case are similar to the facts in the present case, but in others they widely differ. In that case, during the statutory period, the true owners entered upon the land, pulled down the old and built a new fence. Here, as already pointed out, entry was not made until after ten years had elapsed from the time the lots were enclosed, in September, 1901. Further, the plaintiff in the *Coffin* case entered into an agreement, after a threat that he would be evicted unless he acknowledged himself to be a tenant, and promised to give up possession when required, and he did give up possession, and, although living on the adjoining land, he made no claim of any kind until five years after he had given up possession. 

The points of difference are sufficient, I think, to distinguish the *Coffin* case from the present. But I desire to refer to some observations made in the judgment of the *Cown* case to which I cannot accede. It is said there (p. 87): "The plaintiff here cropped the land in question during the summer; during the winter he did nothing to it but draw some loads of manure upon it...During the summer months and during the months when he was sowing the land and reaping his crop, his possession was clearly sufficient beyond question, but during the rest of the year his possession was not actual, nor constant, nor visible. During each winter he says that he drew some manure upon the place and in the spring he spread. Excepting for this he withdrew absolutely to his own lot, which adjoined but was separated by a fence from that of which he claims the possession"— Differing in this respect also from the present. "The winter months must be separated from the summer and we must look at the acts of possession done during those winter months by themselves. Doing this, I think the acts done in the winter did not constitute an occupation of the property to the exclusion of the right of the true owner, but were mere acts of trespass, covering necessarily but a very short portion of the winter, and that the possession must be taken to have been vacant for the remainder of it. The right of the true owner would attach upon each occasion when the possession became thus vacant, and the operation of the Statute of Limitations would cease until actual possession was taken in the spring again by the plaintiff:" citing *Trustees Executors and Agency Co. v. Short*, 13 App. Cas. 793. 

To this proposition of the law I cannot assent. In the case cited, the trial Judge had charged the jury that when any person went into possession of another person's land, and exercised dominion over it with the intention of claiming it, and the Statute of Limitations thereupon began to run as against the owner of the land, such running was never stopped, notwithstanding that the intruder entirely abandoned the land long before the expiration of twenty years from his first entry, and no other person took possession of such land, and that the right of the true owner of the land would not again arise without an entry by such true owner with the intention of repossessing himself of such land. The jury were also told that, at the expiration of twenty years after such taking possession of the land as against the true owner, his right of action was defeated, notwithstanding that there may not have been twenty years' possession as against him. Lord Macnaghten, who delivered the judgment of the Privy Council, after referring to the charge and to the origin of the doctrine, said: "Their Lordships are unable to concur in this view. They are of the opinion that if a person enters upon the land of another and holds possession for a time, and then, without having acquired title under the statute, abandons possession, the rightful owner, on the abandonment, is in the 
same position in all respects as he was before the intrusion took place. There is no one against whom he can bring an action. He cannot make an entry upon himself. There is no positive enactment, nor is there any principle of law, which requires him to do any act, to issue any notice, or to perform any ceremony in order to rehabilitate himself. No new departure is necessary. The possession of the intruder, ineffectual for the purpose of transferring title, ceases upon its abandonment to be effectual for any purpose. It does not leave behind it any cloud on the title of the rightful owner, or any secret process at work for the possible benefit in time to come of some casual interloper or lucky vagrant." 

This final statement of the law was applicable to the *Coffin* case, on the finding that there was there an abandonment of the premises for some four or five years. In the present case there was no abandonment, unless, as Street, J., argues in the Coffin case, "the fact that the land lay idle during the winter." 

It is impossible, I think, to treat what took place in the present case as abandonment. The land was entirely enclosed. It was cultivated and cropped every year. It is begging the question to say that, because the land was not used in the winter time, when it could not be used for any useful purpose, therefore there was an abandonment. Surely abandonment is a matter of intention, and the cultivating and cropping from year to year shews that there never was any intention of abandonment; and the case cited with respect to that point had, I think, no application. 

In *McIntyre v. Thompson*, 1 O.L.R. 163, referred to by Mr. Armour, the land was not wholly enclosed, one end being bounded by a marsh, and through this marsh cattle could and did stray into it. Osler, J.A., refers to this fact at p. 167, and, as I read the case, it formed an important part of the evidence upon which the Court agreed that "the learned trial Judge was right in holding that at the date of the commencement of the former action the defendant had not been in open, visible, actual, and continued possession of the plaintiff's land for the period necessary to give him a possessory title." 

In the case of *Seddon v. Smith*, 36 L.T.R. 168, the defendant, who shared with others a right of way over a piece of land, the property in which was in the lord of the manor, used a portion of the same, amounting to about three-quarters of the whole, in all respects as if it were properly part of his farm, ploughing it from time to time and raising produce thereon. Such user was uninterrupted, and was continued for twenty years or more. As to the remaining quarter, which was not in any way fenced off from the above, it remained in its original condition, and was used for the purposes and in the manner that the whole was originally intended to be used. As to three-quarters, it was held that the defendant had acquired a good title by possession, but not as to the one-quarter. Cockburn, .C.J., says, in part: "I care not what he grew, he used it in all respects as if it were his own; and such a user, I am of opinion, would at last give a title, because the lord of the manor had many ways of putting an end to it had he chosen to do so instead of standing by, as he did, and doing nothing. To my mind it makes no difference whether there be enclosure or not. *Enclosure is the strongest possible evidence of adverse possession*, but it is not indispensable." 

Burton, J.A., in *Harris v. Mudie*, 7 A.R. 414, while pointing out that constructive possession is in the person having the legal title, says (p. 420): "The original taking of possession being wrongful and without colour of right, how can the plaintiff be deprived of more than the defendants have actually cultivated or enclosed?" He makes this observation, treating enclosure as evidence of possession, having present to his mind, as there stated, that the Statute of Limitations should be strictly construed. On p. 421, referring to the suggestion that the only way to make a claim for wild land was by clearing it and using it, he says: "The statement is not accurate, as it is quite possible to enclose wild land." He also refers to *Jackson ex dem. Hardenberg v. Schoonmaker* (1807), 2 Johns. (N.Y.) 230, where that eminent jurist, Kent, C.J., delivering the judgment of the Court, said: "There must be a real and substantial enclosure, an actual occupancy, a *possessio pedis*, which is definite, positive and notorious, to constitute an adverse possession, when that is the only defence, and is to countervail a legal title." On examining the case, it will be found that the fence referred to was a brush fence, "which was made by trees felled and lapping one upon another." It was necessary to go back to this possession fence of 1774 in order to support the possessory title. At this time, it would appear that the lands were not cleared—that "the father-in-law of the defendant cleared the premises in question, in 1786, and the fences remain as they were placed at that time." Kent, C.J., points out that, "if this possession be laid out of view, the possession of 1785, or 1786, was not a possession of twenty years, before the commencement of the suit." 

Burton, J.A., in *Harris v. Mudie*, refers to other cases, American and Canadian, varying upon the question of possession, and points out that "constructive possession has no application in the case of a mere trespasser having no colour of title, and he acquires title under the Statute of Limitations only to such land as he has had actual and visible possession of, by fencing or cultivating, for the requisite period." 

I am unable to gather from the *Harris v. Mudie* case that the facts were precisely similar to the present. Other questions were involved, and I rather infer that there was actual occupancy, as well as enclosure of a certain portion; and—while the language used in the judgment would cover the present case—having regard to the facts there, it may be limited to the concurring incidents of enclosure and occupation. 

In *Worssam v. Vandenbrande*, 17 W.R. 53, the paper title of the plaintiffs was not disputed, but the continuous possession of the defendant for twenty years was denied by the plaintiffs. The interruption on which they relied took place between nineteen and twenty years before writ. Upon that occasion the plaintiffs' predecessors went to the land, and, with implements which they had brought broke down the fence which enclosed the land, and erected a post on the close, to which they affixed a board, on which was painted a statement that any one who desired to take a lease of the land should apply to those on whose behalf the entrance had thus been made. At the time this was done, the close was undoubtedly in the possession of those under whom the defendant claimed; but that possession was evinced solely by the fence. The plaintiffs' party remained on the land three-quarters of an hour. Three days after this, the post and board were gone, but there was no evidence to shew who had removed them, nor was there evidence of any subsequent dealing with the land by act thereupon, by any one, for the next five years. After that period the possession of the defendant was evinced by the acts of the most unequivocal kind—namely, by the erection of buildings. The sole question raised was, whether the entry just described was a mere entry, or was such a dealing with the land as amounted to taking possession so as to interrupt the adverse possession of the defendants." Bovill, C.J., said: "The verdict must stand. The commencement of the defendant's title was in 1845. A fence is put up. This is the sole thing done on the land then. *If this had continued, the title of the defendant would have been good.* In 1848 the fence is destroyed by the true owner, partially, as some say, wholly, as others say. *But now, we must hold that it was wholly destroyed*, for there was evidence to go to the jury that it was wholly destroyed. The post and board are erected. Now is this taking possession or is it a mere entry? There had been no adverse possession but the fence. When that was pulled down I cannot see that anything remained to make the possession of the defendant. The case of the plaintiffs does not rest wholly on the pulling down the fence, and then erecting the post, but also on this, that there is no evidence from 1848 to 1853 of any act on the land hostile to the title of the true owner." Byles, Keating, and Brett, JJ., concurred. 

This case is, I think, in point. The Court, on the finding of the jury, regarded the fence as wholly destroyed, and declared, in so many words, that, if this had continued, the title of the defendant would have been good. In the present case, not only did the fence continue, but the land was cultivated each year. 

I cannot assent to the general statement of Street, J., in the *Coffin* case that the winter months must be separated from the summer months, and that we must look at the acts of possession during those months by themselves, nor to the view there expressed that the acts done in the winter months did not constitute an occupation of the property to the exclusion of the right of the true owner, nor that the property thus became vacant during the winter, and that the right of the true owner would attach, and that the operation of the Statute of Limitations would cease until actual possession was taken in the following spring. No doubt, the statute ceases to run if the adverse possessor quits the land and leaves the possession vacant, as there is no person in whose favour it can run: Lightwood's Time Limit on Actions, p. 12. 

But, where the property is entirely enclosed by the person claiming by possession, his mere absence does not, in my opinion, amount to abandonment or make the premises vacant. It may still be considered under his control, inasmuch as it excludes all others therefrom by his enclosure. If the owner himself claimed before the statute had barred him, he could not reach his land without doing some act. He could not make an entry without at least breaking down, if not destroying, the fence. It is a notice to all the world that the property is claimed by some one and that all others are excluded, and unless there is some act on the part of the true owner to create a new starting-point, and the intruder retains possession by the enclosure, and uses and cultivates the land as his own, either by himself or his servants, although not actually present, in person or by his servants, during portions of the year, the owner is excluded and his title barred after the statutory period. 

Aside from the authorities, it seems to me plain that in the present case the owner's right of action first accrued when the lands in question were enclosed, thereby excluding him. "No person shall make an entry or distress, or bring any action to recover any land or rent, but within ten years next after the time at which the right to make such entry or distress, or to bring such action, first accrued to some person through whom he claims..." sec. 4 of the Real Property Limitation Act, R.S.O. 1897, ch. 133. "Where the person claiming such land or rent, or some person, through whom he, claims, has, in respect of the estate or interest claimed, been in possession...and has...been dispossessed...then such right shall be deemed to have first accrued at the time of such dispossession or discontinuance of possession..." ib., sec. 5, clause 1. 

It seems to me impossible to say, without disregarding the fair meaning of the word, that an owner of land is not dispossessed when another has enclosed his property without leave or colour of right and uses it as his own. By sec. 15, at the end of the period of limitation the right of the party out of possession is extinguished. Here I cannot doubt upon the facts, as found by the trial Judge, fully supported by the evidence, that, during the period required by the statute, the true owner was excluded from possession by the act of the plaintiff, who never abandoned the premises, but, on the contrary, "her possession has been all along, open, obvious, exclusive, and continuous. Until 1906, everything was done upon the land that an owner not residing upon it would do in reaping the full benefit of it, and since the spring of that year everything that an owner in actual, constant occupation would do." 

This is sufficient under the Act, in my judgment, to exclude any right or title of the former owner. 

As pointed out in Halsbury's Laws of England, vol. 19, p. 110, sec. 203: "The true test whether a rightful owner has been dispossessed or not is whether ejectment will lie at his suit against some other person. The rightful owner is not dispossessed, so long as he has all the enjoyment of the property that is possible; and where land is not capable of use and enjoyment, there can be no dispossession by mere absence of use and enjoyment. To constitute dispossession acts must have been done inconsistent with the enjoyment of the soil by the person entitled for the purposes for which he had a right to use it. Mere going out of possession is not enough; in order that the statute may operate there must be not only going out of possession on the part of the former owner, but also actual exclusive possession for the statutory period by some one else to be protected. If a person enters on the land of another and, before he has acquired a title under the statute, abandons possession, no one else then taking possession, the rightful owner is in the same position as if no intrusion had taken place." 

[...]

The judgment in the *Coffin* case may be supported by the facts which I have pointed out; but, in so far as it purports to be applicable to a case like the present, and to declare that the winter months must be separated from the summer months, and that we must look at the acts of possession done during those months by themselves, I cannot agree. And to that extent, and in so far as it is inconsistent with the view herein expressed, that case is overruled. 

Appeal dismissed with costs. 
